PROGRESS.md, before:

# Beven Budget Backend - Progress

## Status: ✅ Phase 1 Complete - Live Deployment

**URL**: https://beven-budget-backend-frankfurt.onrender.com  
**Tech**: Fastify + PostgreSQL + Prisma + JWT  
**Architecture**: Routes ↔ DB separation (stored procedures pattern)

## ✅ Completed (Phase 1)
- [x] **Auth**: JWT Bearer tokens, register/login/me endpoints
- [x] **Budgets**: CRUD operations, summary calculations
- [x] **Categories**: CRUD with automatic spent amount tracking
- [x] **Transactions**: CRUD with category updates
- [x] **Database Layer**: All stored procedures implemented
- [x] **Testing**: Jest setup with basic tests
- [x] **Deployment**: Live on Render.com (Frankfurt)

## 🔄 Planned (Phase 2)
- [ ] **Bill Splitting**: Groups, bills, settlements
- [ ] **Advanced Features**: Analytics, notifications, data export

## API Endpoints
```
GET  /health                    # Health check
GET  /                          # API info
POST /api/auth/register         # User registration
POST /api/auth/login            # User login
GET  /api/auth/me              # Current user
GET  /api/budgets              # List budgets
POST /api/budgets              # Create budget
GET  /api/budgets/:id/summary  # Budget summary
# + categories, transactions CRUD
```

---
**Last Updated**: Oct 28, 2025

Commit message:

Update PROGRESS.md with abandoned approaches
- Document abandoned approaches as per AGENTS.md guidelines
- Include cookie auth, SQLite, Express.js, manual migrations
- Add Redis caching decision for future reference
- Prevents repeating past failed attempts

PROGRESS.md, after:

# Beven Budget Backend - Progress

## Status: ✅ Phase 1 Complete - Live Deployment

**URL**: https://beven-budget-backend-frankfurt.onrender.com  
**Tech**: Fastify + PostgreSQL + Prisma + JWT  
**Architecture**: Routes ↔ DB separation (stored procedures pattern)

## ✅ Completed (Phase 1)
- [x] **Auth**: JWT Bearer tokens, register/login/me endpoints
- [x] **Budgets**: CRUD operations, summary calculations
- [x] **Categories**: CRUD with automatic spent amount tracking
- [x] **Transactions**: CRUD with category updates
- [x] **Database Layer**: All stored procedures implemented
- [x] **Testing**: Jest setup with basic tests
- [x] **Deployment**: Live on Render.com (Frankfurt)

## 🔄 Planned (Phase 2)
- [ ] **Bill Splitting**: Groups, bills, settlements
- [ ] **Advanced Features**: Analytics, notifications, data export

## ❌ Abandoned Approaches
- **Cookie-based Auth**: Initially tried but switched to JWT Bearer tokens for mobile compatibility
- **SQLite for Production**: Tested but insufficient for concurrent users
- **Express.js**: Considered but chose Fastify for better performance
- **Manual DB Migrations**: Abandoned in favor of Prisma's automatic schema management
- **Redis Caching**: Considered but chose node-cache for simplicity and user-specific isolation

## API Endpoints
```
GET  /health                    # Health check
GET  /                          # API info
POST /api/auth/register         # User registration
POST /api/auth/login            # User login
GET  /api/auth/me              # Current user
GET  /api/budgets              # List budgets
POST /api/budgets              # Create budget
GET  /api/budgets/:id/summary  # Budget summary
# + categories, transactions CRUD
```

---
**Last Updated**: Oct 28, 2025
